On the morning of the mining disaster, the highest peak of the Blackvein mountains jabbed at the bloodless morning sun like a pickaxe through a pale golden heart. At the black base of the mountain, Coalridge already had begun to bustle under a patina of coal dust. Mine carts trundled, wagon wheels groaned, mules brayed, and the morning seeped into the overshadowed town with the color of pink, watery blood. 
It happened without warning. No creaks. No tremors. Just ground thunder that shook the mountains to the roots and reverberated through the bones of every living soul. Every ear rang. Dust gushed out of the mouth of the Coalridge Pit and blinded everyone in a black, suffocating fog. The silence afterward. Screaming in desperation and shock, people clawed their way back to the Pit to see what happened, to find anyone who still lived.
Matthis remembered that day over a year ago. The running, the shouts, the crying. The blood. Blood-soaked coal dust was the blackest of blacks he had ever seen. The cave-in claimed twenty-two souls, including five wizards who had specialized in earth magic. He remembered the argument in the village square, the lit torches that whipped angry shadows along the cobbled ground and raked the buildings. He remembered the weeping women, the children who smeared their in their mothers' soot-blackened aprons.
The bars of the new iron gibbet sucked the warmth from his hand. It had been over a year, he reminded himself, since that happened. Over a year since the old tunnel collapsed and almost destroyed everything. In some ways, it had destroyed everything. He tipped the contraption onto its side and rolled it through the village square. It made hollow bong-gong noises from the bars and shallow rattles from the hinges. He stopped to catch his breath in the center of the square. Miners who emerged from their hostels with tools slung in bags over their shoulders watched him. His breath came heavy. His body burned from exertion. 
The looks in the miners' eyes as they passed held a mixture of disgust and respect. Although they avoided eye contact, they walked more slowly as they neared him, and then picked up the pace after they passed. A salute and a snub all at once. No one wanted Matthis' work. Terrible. Reprehensible. But necessary.
Matthis rolled the gibbet to the edge of the village. With every step, the gallows rose above everything. The Death Guild was a squat stone building that reeked of iron, decay, blood, and ash. Iron gibbets hung at intervals on the gallows outside. The gibbet chains clanked with the wind. The yellow, bare bones of the year-old, undead wizard skeletons clacked. One of the iron collar rings, still fastened around a, bony neck, slipped off the intact skeleton's collar bone and chinked against the bars. The undead swayed with the wind. None of them moved. They hadn't ever moved. Not since the last time they fed. 
A small group had gathered near the gallows, which was less a gallows and more like a wooden frame made of mining support beams. Each of them wore the expression of someone about to face a battle. Ready to face death. Matthis recognized Bartholomew, one of the mining wizards, before he even saw him.
"Master of the Death Guild," he said in a loud and almost playful mocking tone, "finally graces us."
"Let's get this done," grumbled one of the others in a voice that sounded like groans from an old timber. "Lay this poor sod to rest." The man gestured at his wooden cart. A quilt lay on top of the cart's contents but couldn't hide the outline of a man.
Matthis grunted in reply. They performed short introductions. The grizzled man was Godric. A woman who fussed over a quilt was named Nell. He pulled the solid metal hasps from their staples. The gibbet fell open down the middle. 
The ceremony was brief. Nell sniffled over the cart. Matthis recognized her as a barmaid from the Staff and Flagon, but he'd never spoken to her before. They stood there and listened to the wind hiss through the trees and the chains. The undead rattled in their gibbets. A chorus of death. The three men stood with hands and arms folded. Nell clutched a shawl around her shoulders, a hand over her mouth and nose. They stood there. Not even the birds chirped.
"I suppose no one thought to call a vicar," said Bartholomew in an uncharacteristically somber voice.
A corner of the quilt flapped onto the cart wheel, revealing a dusty black boot.
They stood there, looking at the boot and the shape under the quilt.
Nothing happened.
"Old vicar doesn't like wizards," said Godric with the grizzled voice. "Probably why. Probably found someplace else to be. Probably forgot."
The main beam on the gallows turned gold.
They stood there, eyes on the cart. 
Matthis rubbed his neck. "Shouldn't we ... say something?"
The chains clinked in the wind. 
They all shivered.
Somewhere beyond the treeline, a raven croaked.
"Was nice to me, he was," said the maid in a steady but hollow voice. Matthis saw tear stains on her cheeks, which were soft and free from coal dust. "Landed up here two months back. like most in Coalridge, by now. But he was nice to me. Didn't want nothing from me. Just his hot plate and a cup, nothing else. Didn't seem to mind that I ... well, he was nice to me. He talked sweetly to me, like I were someone special." Her voice strained. "Someone special."
Interesting, Matthis thought. Come to think of it, he had noticed a subtle difference between the old hostels and taverns and the new one that had cropped up in the recent months. A subtle but unmistakable difference in the height of the barmaids' necklines.
They stood there and watched the body on the cart.
"How exactly did he die?" said Matthis.
The sun crept down the gallow poles. The girl sniffed.
"It wasn't the mine that did it this time," said grizzled Godric. "This time, it was the boy himself."
"Ah," said Bartholomew. "We wizards have to be careful with the amount of magic we use at once. Don't we?"
Godric grunted.
The wind picked up and almost tore the quilt away, but the maid yelped and snatched it at the last second. She tried to smooth it back over the dead man.
"We'd best get on with it," said Bartholomew, his voice sad. He placed a hand on hers. She hesitated, pushed against him, tugged the corners of the quilt to cover the body. Bartholomew didn't budge. They stood there for a moment, Nell's chest heaving. Then she let go and let Bartholomew step around her. Together, the two wizards pulled back the quilt. The maid gathered it off the cart into a bundle.
"Wait," said Matthis, pointing at her. "Don't use that anymore. We don't know what causes the undead to rise."
She dropped the quilt and jumped away from it and rubbed her hands in her apron.
"If it is contagious," said Bartholomew, "you've put yourself at a very great risk." His mocking tone had returned.
"Leave it here," said Matthis. "I'll burn it. When this is over."
Bartholomew and Godric heaved the body out of the cart and into the open gibbet. The maid watched, tears on her cheeks. Matthis had expected her to leave, or at least to turn away, but she watched. The iron ring fit snugly around the dead man's neck, and his legs barely fit through the bars at the bottom. The man must have been an excellent wizard, or at least well fed. Matthis fastened the hasps with a thick iron pins while the other two pushed the two halves closed. It took quite a long time to pull the whole thing up to the beam with ropes, and when they got it there, Matthis climbed a ladder and hooked one of the chains hanging from the iron loop at the top of the cage onto a heavy iron spike driven into the gallows beam. He untied the hauling rope and climbed down.
They stood there so quietly that he could feel when they held their breath.
The fresh, unrusted metal of the new gibbet shone in the cold sun.
Another raven croaked in the trees, mournful, far away.
The movement began slowly at first. It could have been mistaken for wind. The bones clacked and creaked like always. Then they moved all at once. When the commotion began, the maid Nell yipped and turned away. Bartholomew groaned, folded his arms, and fondled a stone he took out of his pocket, eyes downcast. The other wizard Godric bowed his head. But Matthis forced himself to watch. The more knowledge he gained from these creatures, the more easily he could prevent more of them.
All the skeletal remains moved together. Without a groan or any other sound, just the clinks of metal and rustling of bone, all the skeletal remains clawed and reached toward the new corpse, their quiet mouths open, their arms waving and scrabbling. Two of the skeletons nearest the new gibbet grabbed an arm each and gorged out chunks of the dead wizard's flesh. Black, congealed blood oozed from the wounds. The skeletons smeared the flesh all over their skulls, jaws, and gumless, perpetually smiling teeth. 
Matthis watched the gut-churning scene carefully. He had fed them scraps of a rabbit he had snared in the woods a few weeks ago, but this was the first human flesh he had ever watched them consume. Beyond his disgust, and apart from the unnaturalness of living dead, what he had done felt ... wrong. But every new bit of information could save someone's life one day. He swallowed hard and told himself this would be worth it. As the case was in all his other experiments, the bits they rubbed on their skulls somehow disappeared, as though it was absorbed into the very bones of these unnatural creatures. They didn't seem any more or less eager to consume this body than any other raw flesh he'd fed them. 
"You all can leave," he said to the others. No one else should have to endure this.
Long after the others left, Matthis watched the new corpse as it was slowly eaten before his eyes.
