Matthis awoke by vomiting. His body paralyzed, his cheek to the ground, he heaved over and over until all of Elspeth's bread pooled around him and stuck to face, and then kept heaving. Matthis collapsed onto his back. The starry sky, heedless of him, flickered as usual. His body contorted into one last heave, and he spat thick yellow bile onto a pair of miner's boots at his feet.
The dead wizard stood outside of its gibbet, arms stripped of flesh to the bone, eye sockets a pair of black holes, leather lips ripped and stretched away from its brown teeth.
It cocked its head. Matthis stopped breathing.
The skeletons in their cages scrambled and clawed at Matthis. The trees hissed in the wind. The alarm chains clinked. 
Careful to avoid the pool of his own vomit, Matthis rose. The uncaged corpse did not move. It didn't scramble, or claw at his face, or even moan. Behind it, the entire cage appeared to have vanished. Sockets and eyes locked together, the corpse turned on the spot as Matthis circled the gallows. They both ignored the silent struggle of the skeletons. The leather, blank holes in the corpse's face trained instinctively onto Matthis wherever he moved.
The corpse's gibbet hadn't vanished. Silvery glints of starlight and moonlight flashed where it once hang. Matthis lifted a hand to touch it. His finger contacted thread. He tugged on it, expecting it to break away like slider silk, but it held hard. He recognized the texture. The entire contraption had transformed from solid iron into thread.
A bony finger touched his own. Matthis jumped. The corpse's head turned to him, finger outstretched. It cocked its head again, and realization slipped like icy stream water down Matthis' back. It mirrored his movements. Matthis relaxed, hand still tangled in the string. The corpse touched end of its finger bone with Matthis'. It spread its fingers apart. Matthis hesitated and did the same. They pressed living palm together with black, undead bone. 
As one, they dropped their arms. 
Matthias backed away. He slapped himself. Nothing changed. He slung his satchel over his shoulder. Too heavy. He slapped himself again. He shook his head. The wizard, two unnaturally black bone arms at its sides, stared at him. The skeletons on either side of it switched targets from Matthis to the wizard and clawed at it, just out of reach. Their bones clacked inches from its rotted face. 
Matthias pressed his fingers to his eyes until he saw stars. It hurt. When the stars cleared the corpse still stood there. The smithy. A new gibbet was there. He had seen it. It was identical to the others, so no one would notice. His heart fluttered. He marched toward the square. He could pull it out and then ... But he couldn't get it on the gallows without help. Not with a half rotted corpse locked inside it. He stopped. The grind of boots in dirt scraped behind him. The wizard was there. Arms at its sides, it leaned against the strings. They snapped. It stumbled, caught itself, and straightened. Matthis collapsed into a sitting position. 
The wizard stood above him. No breath. No sound. Just empty sockets. Matthis turned away from it. He faced the square. And waited.