A year ago. 
The moment would burn itself in Matthis' memory. A shovelful of coal as he tossed it into the wagon. The mules braying. Corven, Bartholomew, and Godric with their heads together. The morning struggled to crest the Blackvein peaks. 
And then the earth heaved. 
Matthis hit the dirt. The air turned to black powder. He sat up and landed on his shoulder. His hand came up smeared in blood and coal dust. The blackest black he had ever seen. His lungs burned, but he couldn't hear himself cough. Men ran to the pit, mouths open. But Matthis heard nothing. Just ringing.
Someone shook him. Bartholomew. His mouth moved, and he pointed at the Pit. 
Matthis should be in there. He stood. Bartholomew jogged into the mine. Sound returned in one, slow wave. A man screamed, his leg caught under the body of a mule. Another rocked, holding his arm, his eyes glazed. Several lay sprawled on the ground. 
He should be in there. Matthis fell back. He should help. He lay flat. His chest hurt. It was not his lungs. He should move. 
He did nothing.
--
They felt it in their bones first. The ground lurched. Half the mob collapsed to the dust. The wizard stood, more solid than stone. 
Mercy fought with her skirts. Corven swore loudly. Rafe looked at the mountain and back at Matthis. Bartholomew sprinted toward the mountain. People shouted the names of loved ones. The Vicar fell to his knees, hands clasped, and prayed. 
The mine. 
The undead wizard groaned. 
Matthis clenched his fists. He didn't think this time. He moved. 
He wove through the crowd and charged into the square at a dead sprint. A single long shriek echoed in the valley. He followed the sound between houses. He had never run so fast before. He turned a corner. The scream wasn't coming from the mine. 
He halted.
A square hut had turned to transparent glass. A tiny girl wailed at its center. In one corner, mud bubbled up between the wooden floor panels. A man and woman lay nearby, clothing torn to shreds, eyes closed. 
Matthis searched for the door, but the roof, ceiling, and walls had fused into a single piece of glass. The little girl shrieked again. The sound was amplified by the house.
Matthis scrambled for an opening but the door-shaped pane had no seams, no hinges, no opening. He pounded the glass with his fist. His knuckles bled. 
People gathered behind him but he hardly noticed. He ripped off his jacket and wrapped it around his hand. He pounded the glass, which shook. He kept pounding. It cracked. The door shattered. 
He stepped around the mud fountain. But it was not mud. It did not bubble from the ground. The floorboards were bleeding.
The man and woman flickered. Chairs draped in torn clothes stood in their place. Flick, back to human. They did not breathe. Their mouths fell open, eyes rolled back. Flick. Chairs. Flick-flick-flick. 
The little girl could not have been more than five years old. Matthis knelt in front of her. Her head was swept back, mouth bawling. Flick-flick-flick. The ground trembled. Blood poured from the floor. 
He didn't think. He simply reached for her. Their palms touched. The girl stopped wailing and opened her puffy eyes. She pressed her palm against his. 
Something moved in him, a force that began deep in his body. Like when he had pummeled the wizard's decayed forehead. It moved through him, but softly this time. 
The girl collapsed into him, her little fingers around his thumb, an arm around his neck. The humans flickered once more -- flesh, chairs -- and stopped. The blood bubbling from the floor eased, slowed, ended. He tasted metal. 
She clutched him and sobbed quietly into his tunic. He rocked. He stroked her hair. Behind him, much of the crowd had gathered. 
When he stood, his legs shook and his stomach ached a little. Her arm around his neck tightened. She squeezed his thumb. He walked through the shattered doorway. 
Elspeth was there. She pried the girl off him and clutched her.
Matthis squared his shoulders. He met the eyes of the Vicar, Bartholomew, Mercy. Rafe met his eye. Mercy and the men who had led the mob were the first to turn away. 
The wizard moaned. 
"Are ..." His voice sounded like dry twigs rubbed together. "Do you still want to kill me?"
He braced. 
One by one, the crowd drifted away. Mercy glowered at him over her shoulder, but left. 
The girl squirmed and slept in Elspeth's arms. 
Matthis gestured weakly at the glass house. "Should we," he said around a lump in his throat, "do something?"
Elspeth's green eyes shone.
"Breakfast first?"
The lump tightened. 
They walked to the Oak and Ember, side by side. Matthis liked the way their shoulders touched. 