The Vicar stood at the center of the square. Not an old man, but not young either. Wiry, with gray hair, he wore brown robes and simple brown shoes. Everyone stood in a circle around him. Matthis heard snippets of conversation. A woman asked her husband to rub her back. A group of miners huddled in a corner of the square with brows furrowed, probably over the price of coal. Mercy pushed through the crowd to whisper to the Vicar, who nodded. Elspeth held an unlit candle and spoke to the boy Matthis had need earlier that day. The boy smiled and accepted the candle from Elspeth. He stood beside her and held the candle the way a loyal sentinel might hold a spear. She smiles down at him.
"Glad to see you here." Rafe appeared at Matthis' elbow. "I heard you a went into the mine again?"
Matthis nodded.
"What did you find?"
Matthis recalled the white room, the strange shifts in time, the dead sound. 
"Mine gas."
Rafe paused. "There were one hundred and fifty people on this village before the mine was discovered. You know how many there are now?"
Matthis grunted and nodded. 
Rafe told him anyway. "Fifteen hundred."
"When Moonfall Hollow quit producing silver," said Matthis, "Coalridge was a perfect fit for most."
"Can't have been easy for you," said Rafe, "to watch your home get, well ... invaded?"
"Can't fault a pickaxe for digging."
The mountain's shadow had reached the edge of the square when the Vicar raised his hands. 
"Our dear Goodman Morell has passed on." 
The crowd whispers died like an echo in mineshaft.
"For many months now, it has been our tradition to observe the signs of unlife in our beloved dead."
The circle parted. Men balanced a funeral litter on their shoulders. On it lay a corpse with liver spots on its wax-colored head. A bouquet of yellow and white flowers lay clasped in its wrinkled hands. The men set the litter before the Vicar and joined the circle.
"Let us watch, " said the Vicar, "and hope that the body of our Goodman Morell may remain still. I two hours after sunset, he has not stirred then tomorrow we lay him to rest. May your soul move into the afterlife.l, Goodman Morell."
The Vicar lit a candle. People from the crowd stepped forward and lit candles against his. The silence turned to a reverent murmur. 
"Three hours?" Rafe hissed into Matthis' ear. "I was there when you told him four."
Matthis kept his eyes on the flowers. The flowers had been his idea as well. The petals would shiver first. 
"It doesn't matter."
"It would to me." 
Elspeth laughed when the boy flounced back to his place beside her, so exuberant that his candle almost snuffed out. She laughed, but Matthis felt it better than he heard it.
The flowers fluttered. 
The crowd froze. Every mouth stopped. Every eye looked to the dead hands, the closed eyes. Matthis could feel the village folk hold their breath. The trees shivered.
"Wind," said the Vicar. "Just wind."
The crowd relaxed. Chatter resumed. Matthis overheard a conversation. With the Vicar and a child.
"Why doesn't the Bone Man make sure Good Morell doesn't wake up, Vicar?"
"Goodman Morell is our friend. Everyone is here to see that he peacefully passes on."
"But if he wakes up, then the Bone Man will get him. He won't pass on. He'll be stuck here."
Matthis found the Vicar's eyes through the crowd. The Vicar smiled at Matthis but quickly shifted his gaze.
"Don't worry about that, my dear. All will turn out well in the end."
The candles shortened. Tension rose and fell with the wind through the flowers. Rafe chatted with Matthis for a while and moved through the crowd to talk to others. Matthis saw him talk to Corven, the Miner's Guild master. Matthis kept his eyes on the corpse.
When only Matthis, the Vicar, and Rafe remained in the square, he stood by the corpse and laid a hand on the old head. It was cold. The hands were stiff. 
"I asked him, Vicar," Rafe was saying. "I asked him, and he said it was four hours. Not two."
The Vicar sighed. "Right. We'll keep it to four, then."
Matthis walked behind them as they lifted the litter.
"Before they discovered the mine," said Rafe, "this place was just a collection of cabins. No name, just a little community of trappers. A mine really changes a place."
The moon crested the Blackvein peaks. Rafe and the Vicar set the corpse down in the morgue. It smelled of earth and must. 
Matthis touched the corpse one last time. It lay as it should. The change would not surprise him. Not ever again. Matthis blew out his candle.
--
Matthis paced the path to the Death Guild hut by moonlight. His body weighed too much. And his sweat had turned to grime. 
The wind whistled through the gallows. The chains chinked together. The wizard moaned.
With his hand on the door, Matthis stopped. His skin stuck to his tunic. Dust fell from his hair. He couldn't stand it. He shut the door and went into the woods.
He arrived at a small stream that cut by a meadow. Tree roots had made a small, natural dam. Matthis stripped and hung his clothes on branches. Then he slipped into the water. 
Cold. Smooth rocks under his feet. The gentle flow of water around his body. He dunked his head in and gasped. Filth from his skin and hair floated away. 
He laid his head back on the mossy bank. Recent events slipped off his shoulders and dissolved into the water. The mine. The strange white room he had probably hallucinated. The boy and his anxious dog. Muriel pounding on his chest and inviting him to tea. Mercy's accusations. The vigil. Tears slid down his cheeks. He washed those away too. The moonlight rippled.