Matthis woke to the sound of moaning again. The gaps in the hut leaked air too cold and flat to be morning yet. He guessed he had slept two hours after his bath.
He sat up. His foot nudged his satchel. Wide awake, he emptied his satchel on the floor. The lantern from the mine rolled out. He should return that. A black book entangled in his soot-stained kerchief. And Elspeth's bread. He had forgotten to eat it. He brushed coal dust from the broken loaf. Still soft. He set it aside and swallowed the anticipation of its taste. 
He touched the magic lantern and its usual orange light hurt his eyes. He turned it off. He had better eyesight in the dark than he thought. 
He dusted off the black book. Someone's ledger, he supposed. The pages were blank. He thumbed back to the first. The paper was finer than he'd seen. Not vellum like the books he knew. Ink marked the top margin, fancier than the script and scratch in the miner's guild ledgers. 
He squinted at the first letter. Two humps. The third looped in a way he didn't like. Me... mo... He ground his teeth. Mne... mo... syne. He grimaced and set it aside. 
If he went to the Pit this early, he could replace the lantern he'd accidentally stolen without spectacle. 
He still held Elspeth's bread. He gave in and munched it. Two days old, and it still melted in his mouth. He slung his satchel over his shoulder, which tugged harder than usual. Coal dust, he supposed.
He opened the door. The wizard moaned. 
--
After he had returned the mine lantern, Matthis sat before the gallows. The wizard moaned. 
"Shut. Up."
He lay on his back and watched the pink and purple sky spin. He had slept two hours. But it felt like a full night. 
"How do I fix this?"
The wizard moaned. 
He considered sleep but knew it wouldn't come. When he sat up, his satchel tipped and the contents spilled out. Dust, kerchief, a black book.
There was more ink on the page. He squinted at it. 
A stone staircase. A black skeleton climbs without stopping. A woman stands at the top. Her palm rests on its skull. She turns. It does not move.
He slammed the book shut. The wizard moaned. 