The sound of his feet echoed too long. The darkness ahead swelled too close. The darkness behind closed too quickly. He was being swallowed.
The hollow orange light of his lantern barely touched the walls, turning them a burnt black. But he remembered these passages. Down the first shaft, they had changed the ladder from wood to metal and anchored it into the stone. In Old Bed, the dug out passage was still too low to stand upright but widened out to a chamber the width and length of the village square. Along Left Fork, the tunnel still widened into a natural cave that had long been stripped of its stalagmites and stalactites. But mineral water still carved a gnarled scar down one wall of the tunnel and slid into a culvert gored into the rock by magic. 
Magic always left something else. Something unintended. The magic to make the culvert had turned one patch of wall into a squishy, flesh-colored bulb the size of a fist. It pulsed, soundless and bloodless. Knives and pickaxes and earth magic could not extricate or cut it. Matthis raised his hand and held it there. He reached out a finger. And touched it. It was warm. The pulse felt like a heartbeat. He wished he hadn't touched it.
He continued on. Past the dug out seams along Left Fork, which led nowhere. Past an air shaft made by magic to the surface. The unintended effect of that magic had turned a stretch of wall underneath the air shaft into a strange crystal. A crystal that never stopped growing. At least, not for the first week after the magic was cast. Matthis touched the spot where it had formed. He remembered the finger-length bits of crystal that had showered from it like a waterfall of rock. They had kept a bucket underneath it to keep the miners from tripping on the useless minerals, which had turned out to be bits of brittle granite that broke or turned to dust between the fingers.
The mine kept its own time. Thirty minutes or three hours could have passed when Matthis exited the Left Fork and emerged into a widened area. The area where the cave-in had occurred. It used to be a tunnel that connected to a network of coal seams. But they had collapsed under their own weight.
He had expected something to be left behind. He remembered the piles of rubble, the gigantic boulders, the endless soil and gravel everywhere, the dust that never settled. The suffocation. Now, the piles were gone. They left nothing but smooth stone behind. 
He knelt at the spot where he had helped pull out one of the victims. The ceiling felt higher now. He remembered crouching under a spot in the ceiling above him. The man had been covered in black dust, unrecognizable as human. He had lain trapped and bleeding for hours under the debris. Hours. The blood had congealed on his face and mixed with the dust. That blackness had never come off him. Even after death. 
Matthis stood and inspected the walls. He took the lantern off his belt and investigated the rock with his hands. When magic burst from wizards, the unintended effect could be anything. He crawled into a seam that looked newer, as though it still had coal to give. He had once seen flowers sprout out of rock and wither to dust at a wizard's feet during magical excavation. He covered his mouth and nose with a kerchief he pulled from his satchel and felt around the little shelf. He moved on to the next. And the next. And the next. 
Black from hair roots to heels, he stood in the middle of the chamber. He pulled down his kerchief and shook it out. He tied his lantern back onto his belt. He dusted off his arms. He scratched dust out of his ears. If he turned around, he would go back. If he turned left, he would go on. He looked at the ceiling. He looked at the floor. Dust fell from his hair. This was just an accident. That's all it was. 
He knelt again for a moment. At the spot where the man had died. Where so many had died. He placed a hand on the rock and closed his eyes. 
He stood. 
He turned left.
--
The shallow tunnel smelled like earth. The support beams grew closer together, and some places were shored up with timber reinforced with mortar and clay. He passed an air shaft that revealed the surface to be only about twenty feet above him. He could see pink morning light at the end of it.
The tunnel ended in an abrupt downward shaft. He did not remember this one, but he could see the bottom at the very edge of his lamp light. Some shafts had landings, a short tunnel with an air shaft, another downward shaft, and then shelves. This felt familiar. 
He clambered onto the landing and moved along the tunnel. It stopped and turned a corner.
Matthis rounded the corner and took four steps. Sound stopped. He clapped once. The sound died immediately. 
He looked back at the tunnel. He saw a wall of black. He looked forward. It was a wall of white. He reached forward and touched nothing. He crouched down and touched the floor. Solid, but not cold stone. Too smooth to be wood.
When he tried to stand again, something slammed into his shoulder. He looked left and his nose touched the floor. He had fallen sideways. 
He closed his eyes and breathed. Mine gas, perhaps. That was it. It had to be. He needed to turn back. It would poison him. 
He rolled to face the tunnel. It had become a black dot on a wall of white. Too far away. Low to the ground, he crawled toward the dot. But every shuffling movement forward made it smaller, smaller, smaller. 
He didn't know how long he lay there. Unlike the mine, this white place didn't stop time. It was not-time. He shut his eyes. No. It was more ... ancient.
When he opened his eyes, the white around him took shape. A room. The floor sloped down toward a cluster of tables at its center. Like a bowl. He looked up, and the ceiling was a perfect bowl as well. He was inside two bowls put together. But no seams. No joints. No lines anywhere. 
Far, far away, there was a tiny dot the size of the mole on his left forearm. On the ceiling. He squinted. A dark trail of dust tracked its way from the dot in the ceiling, zig zagged down the sloped wall, and ended where he stood. 
Somehow, he had entered through the ceiling and down the wall. Or perhaps he stood on the ceiling now. Dizzy, he knelt and touched the ground again. But it didn't help. He cast around for something, anything to give him a frame of reference. He stood. He walked. Something touched his leg. It was a table.
The cluster of tables held various silver or gold instruments, like utensils, but without any obvious purpose. He dared not touch any of them. Some looked sharp, but without an edge, or heavy, but without size, or dangerous, but he couldn't tell why. 
Matthis focused instead on the books. Dozens of them lay everywhere, opened, stacked together, facedown. He inspected one with red and black ink. Like most in Blackvein, he couldn't read, but he had never seen writing like this before. The pages smelled nothing like the vellum used for the ledgers he had seen at the Miner's Guild house. The black cover of one felt odd, sticky and slick. Unlike the usual leather. He opened it. Blank. But the quality. Now he knew it wasn't vellum. Paper. Exquisite. Extravagant. One page of a single book here, any book, could be worth a miner's entire week of wages. And if any of them had inlaid gold foil, even with illegible laanguage, it could be worth half the mine. Or more.
He laid the black book down and circled the tables. An instrument reminded him of a needle, but it never came to a point. One book lay open to a drawing of something he almost recognized, like a tree, but upside down. He was about to turn it around when he realized the black book sat under his arm, but he couldn't remember putting it there. He set it down and inspected the drawing. This wasn't a book, but stack of papers folded together. He laid the black book next to it with the vague feeling like he had already done that, and spun the drawing around. No matter which direction it faced, the drawing still resembled an upside down tree. Its branches twisted in a distinct way that reminded him of curly hair. 
If he stood far enough away, it looked like a tree, but the closer he moved his face toward it, the more it resembled a hearth. The fire seemd to crackle on the page, and he could almost hear Elspeth telling him to sit down and almost tasted her bread. 
He stepped back. The dot overhead looked eternally out of reach. He turned to go, reaching to stuff the black book in his satchel. Oh wait. He replaced the book on the table. He must have picked it up again and forgotten. He looked up again. The dot seemed so far away. He backed away a few steps, thinking of a way to get up there. 
The dot widened when he stepped back. He stepped forward. It shrank. He turned around on the spot, careful not to move forward or backward. The dot remained. Frowning, he adjusted his satchel, which felt heavier than usual, and walked backward. The dot expanded. Confused, he bent his neck and massaged the ache. 
Ahead, the floor curved up and away. Behind him, the tables had moved. They were stuck to the wall now, far to his left. A faint trail of dust made a wide arc from the tables to his feet. He looked up. The dot was there, the size of his knuckle. He stepped back. It widened to the size of his palm. With each step, it grew until his shoulders could fit through. He looked around for the tables and saw white. He craned his neck again and reached out to the hole. 
His hands made contact with dirt. By instinct, he jumped and pulled himself through and landed back in the dark tunnel onto his side. 