A hollow rattle woke Matthis in the Death Guild hut. Three small boxes lined the bare wall opposite his cot. He had broken pieces of bone from three of the skeletons the night before and ground them in a pestle he made. The box in the middle made a rattle sound, then a scratch. He opened it. An ivory finger bone wiggled along the edge of the box. It scratched and flung itself, random, directionless. 
Outside, he held the box under the gallows. The skeletons hung limp in their gibbets. His eyes on the finger, he walked along the line of cages. The bone's movement didn't change when its body was near.
"Why've you got sticks in cages, mister?"
A muddy child stood next to a gray, filthy dog with matted fur. The boy's eyes were round and curious. Innocent. 
Matthis rubbed his neck. He feared he knew how this conversation would end. "What's your name?"
"Can I have one of the sticks?" 
The panting dog yawned and lay next to the boy. It turned its long snout away from the gallows. It yawned again and stood. It turned in a circle and whined. 
"Tell me young boy," said Matthis. He put an edge in his tone. "Why would anyone put sticks in cages?"
"Cos Bikka takes them away, that's why." The boy puffed his chest in defiance. "And you has good ones, you has. Nice and thick. Good for Notty." He patted the dog's head. It relaxed in a sitting position. Then it stood and yawned, and paced a circle beside the boy. 
Matthis bit the inside of his cheek. "Let me show you something, lad."
He knelt at the boy's feet. The dog backed away as he approached, eyes on the box in Matthis' hand. 
"What you got a worm in there for?" The dog growled. "Hush, Notty."
"You must understand, boy," said Matthis with an edge. He picked up the finger bone and set it in the boy's hand. "It's not a worm."
The bone wiggled between the boy's fingers. The boy's hand jerked. He shouted. The bone flew at Matthis' chest. 
"What's a bone moving like that for? That's not what bones do." He stomped his little feet. The dog barked at the wiggling bone, eyes wild, tail tucked.
"Why?" the boy cried. "Why would you do something like that? Bodies should be in the ground. Bikka says, when people die, they go in the ground." Tears streaked the boy's thin cheeks. "Less they can't move on, Bikka says."
Bikka. The Vicar. Of course.
Matthis plucked the bone from the dirt and placed it in the box. He shut the lid. The dog stopped barking. 
"The Vicar is right." His voice was gentle. "But you see them?" He pointed to the bones.  "They don't stay in the ground."
The boy's red eyes widened. He stopped crying. "Those are bones, aren't they?" He hiccupped. "But why? Why they hanging there?"
Memories shot behind Matthis' eyes like lightning. Freshly dug graves under the gallows. Miners gathered around the holes with their shovels and pickaxes to help. Lowering one of the undead bones into the hole, wrapped in chains and nailed into a box. One week. It took one week for them to claw their way out. He was there. The skull pushed out of the mound. Its soulless sockets full of dust, dirt, mud. He shook the memory from his hands. It clung harder than coal dust.
Matthis sighed. He folded himself and sat on the ground in front of the boy. Their eyes held.
"Wouldn't want them walking around. Would we?"
For a moment, the boy looked like Matthis' warmth might melt him. His shoulders rounded. His hands lifted toward Matthis. But he stopped himself and bared his teeth. "That's scary." The boy backed away. "You're scary, bone man."
Matthis stood. His legs shook. The box weighed too much. 
"You're ... you're bad." The boy held his head, thinking. Uncertain. He looked between the bones in the gibbets and Matthis, whose jaw had tightened. He turned and ran. The dog sprinted ahead. 
Matthis watched them, the dog barking, the boy yelling, "Bone man! Bone man!" in terror. He sighed. He'd hoped to comfort them.
Matthis opened the box and wrestled the finger into his palm. He marched to one of the skeletons and batted away its desperate scratches for his eyes, face, any soft flesh it could find. He jammed the finger back onto the bleached knuckle and pushed it away before the hand could claw out his throat. 
Bone man. Salt and dust lodged behind his teeth. A cold laugh slipped out. Dry and hollow as bone.
--
Something was wrong with the newest corpse. It sat there, like the others. It stank, like the others had when they still had flesh to rot. It struggled and reached for him like the others, if he stood too close. Its stripped arm bones had turned brown in the sun, as expected. But there was something wrong about it. One of their rib cages uttered a low, wooden whistle in the wind. It moaned. It should have stopped that by now. 
"You curwit!" 
An old woman wobbles her way toward the gallows. Matthis strides to her and caught her elbows. 
"Please don't get too close to them, Goody Muriel --"
She wrenched her arms away and slammed her balled fists on his chest. He lowered his hands.
"You grave-robber! You dirt-jumper!" She punctuated her screams with hard pounds to his ribs. "You took my son from his rest! You strung him up like my sweet boy was some criminal! You left him for the crows!"
His lips tightened almost imperceptibly. He squared his stance. He did not flinch. 
"How dare you take my boy from me? He's there!" She pointed at the skeleton behind him. "My Osric is there! You've stripped him! You ruined him! Nothing but bones now! How dare you!"
"Goody Muriel ..."
Matthis remembered the funeral a year ago. The dust hadn't fully settled. The sun had shone bright on the polished grave marker. 
"You marrow-sucking fiend! I'll see you hang for this, gibbet rat!" Her fists slowed. "I'll get you and see what ... I'll make you pay and then ..." 
Her words faded to mutterings. She slumped against him, and he held her tiny shoulders while she gasped and panted into his chest. Her breath slowed. She looked up. 
"Oh, young Matthis."
"Hello, Goody Muriel."
"So nice to see you this fine day." She patted his arm. "And when will you call me Aunty, like I've asked you so many times?"
"Yes, Aunty Muriel."
She pulled away from him and totted away.
"Do come by for a cuppa one of these days, won't you?" she called over shoulder. "My Osric and I will be happy to have you round."
"Yes," said Matthis around a lump in his throat, "Aunty Muriel."
He watched her wobble away until her image blurred. He blinked hard before stears could streak his face.
He turned and faced Osric's bones. They rattled when he stepped within reach. He held the wrists away from his face. The fingers scrabbled at the air inches from Matthis' cheeks. He breathed hard and forced himself to stare into those empty sockets. Osric had brown eyes once.
Two cages down the line, the wizard that should not have been able to make sound anymore moaned again. 
"What happened to you all, Osric?"
The bones clacked against the bars of their cage.
--
The bones of the undead wizard's left arm had turned black. Not the right arm. Matthis could not remember from that morning if they had been black or reddish brown, like the right arm.
The wizard moaned. 
Matthis wrenched the wizard's right arm down and tied it to its cage. It struggled with its black arm to scratch and claw at Matthis' face. He held it by the wrist and examined the unusual bone. 
Matthis heard Rafe approach before the man spoke. 
"You're not just looking at the dead now. You're flirting with it."
Matthis ignored him. The black bone didn't appear different from the white ones. The flesh had gone from it as though it had bleached away or burned off. Matthis had burned bones before. This was not burned.
"We're the same, you and I," said Rafe.
Matthis stopped. He looked at Rafe, who leaned against a shovel. His smile looked like a grimace. 
Matthis raised his eyebrows. 
"Oh, you know," Rafe said with a shrug. "Same age. Similar occupation."
Matthis nodded at the shovel. "Who passed this time?" He pushed the black bone away and stepped back before it could claw him. If it were a miner, he would have heard. 
"Goodman Morell."
Rafe paused as though Matthis should have known the name. They looked at each other. Rafe smiled. 
"The Miner's Guild sent you?"
Rafe's smile deepened. "No. I'd have thought you would know him. Hadn't you heard he fell ill?"
Matthis swallowed against a tightness in his jaw. He folded his arms. The wizard moaned. 
"When will you make that thing stop doing that?"
"What are you doing here, Rafe?" Matthis tried to keep the cold out of his voice. 
"So you don't know that he died this morning. I should have guessed." Rafe lifted his shovel and set it on his shoulder. "You should make friends, Matthis."
He walked away. 
"The vigil?" Matthis called. 
"Just be in the square before dark," Rafe answered.
The wizard moaned. 
--
Ivory pieces of four different disassembled skeleton hands lay scattered before Matthis. He leaned against the gallows beam, shaded from the late afternoon sun. The bones twitched. He tied a string around the ones that had belonged to one of the wizards who had died in the cave in a year ago, a man named Alrik. The other bones belonged to the new wizard whose corpse still rotted in his gibbet. The left hand was black. The right hadn't dried out yet. It was still pinkish where flesh remained. Brown everywhere else. Dry and leathery. He had torn off the ligaments to aid in the experiment, and almost vomited with the effort. But the left hand was black. All its flesh and ligaments had gone. The connective cartilage between joints had hardened. Compared to the older sun bleached bones, this black one looked unnatural. Too black. Too dry. Like the others, it moved. But it moved more ... carefully.
The bits of bone shuffled like beetles with half their legs shorn off by a boot. Their movements looked chaotic, uncoordinated. A pile that twitched.
"How dare you make playthings of our dead." 
A woman hissed at Matthis from the guild hut door. She wore an ankle length dress and tied her hair back into a slick, tight bun that strained her hair roots. She had a face like a flower, perfect proportions and feathery eyes. She clutched her heart with both hands.
"Can I help you?"
"You must enjoy this disgusting work, don't you?" she spat.
Matthis grit his teeth and looked away. A memory struck his gut. Waking in the Death Guild hut covered in sweat, panicked by a dream of bones. The hot night filled with the stench of death. That was last summer, right after the dead had risen from their graves. 
He gathered the hand bones in a box to keep them from escaping. He tried not to hunch his shoulders against the woman's barrage. 
"If you were half decent a man, you would have let these poor souls rest by now. What do you mean, hanging them up like this? You would deny them the peace of the next life?"
He left the box at the door of the gallows and stood before her, arms loose at his sides. The managed a blank, relaxed expression. He feared she would interpret a smile as feral or aggressive.
"Your name is Millicent, right?"
"It's Mercy, you disgusting dog."
"Let me ask you something, Mercy." He kept his voice level, but his tone was harder than intended. He pointed to the gallows. "What would you suggest?"
"Burn them," she said without hesitation. "They'll stop moving then. We could use the lime burner from the mine. I've already spoke to Elric the kiln man, and he confirmed --"
"So did I," said Matthis. "Let me show you something."
He marched into the guild house and emerged with a box. He opened it. It held pieces of bone.
"How dare you!" Mercy shrieked. "How dare you desecrate the dead like this!"
He shook the box at her. "I burned this hand in the lime kiln one week ago tomorrow. Then I ground the bone to dust. Look at it now." He shook the reconstituted bone at her. "Tomorrow, the bones will be moving again."
She clenched her fists to her sides. "When you're gone, they sit there. If you just let them alone, they would stop moving." She jabbed a finger in his chest. "Did you ever think of that in your little macabre experiments?"
Matthis growled and stalked inside. He returned to the gallows. He ignored Mercy. 
In the box, the black hand had reassembled. It pressed its fingers against the wood, joint by joint. Patiently. Matthis stared. The box rattled at his feet.