The rattle of chains and an awful, familiar growl tore Matthis out of bed. Wrapped in bedclothes, he rushed out of the Death Guild bunk. Images replayed fresh from his memory: Partially decayed bodies covered in dirt and running, not stumbling, through the village. Torches and pickaxes raised above the heads of a screaming crowd. A corpse bearing down on a woman who had tangled herself in her skirts and fallen, the child she held scrambling and tearing his mother's skin bloody in terror at the thing that bore down on them. Matthis could almost hear them, even a year later, all of them. Their cries for help that he couldn't give.
All the bodies still hung in their gibbets. The alarm chains swung under them and clinked together. There was no wind. All the skeletons strained in their cages toward the undead wizard's body with unnatural, tireless strength. A pile of flesh lay at the center of a black pool of blood under the newest body. It sat in its cage, passive, unmoving, and uttered a brittle, dry moan at random intervals. Matthis' breathing didn't slow until he accounted for them all, twice. Two of the skeletons hanging furthest from the new corpse had strained so hard against their neck collars that their skulls had broken off completely and rattled between their bony femurs. One had lost the entire lower half of its leg, which lay on the ground below it, the foot pushing the appendage around in a circle. Another missed half the fingers of one hand, which seemed to have been crushed between two swinging cages. The skeletons continued to strain toward the dead flesh, heedless of any pain or their missing parts.
Matthis collapsed to the ground. Cold sweat slicked down his neck. He lay here, still breathing hard. After a time, he arose and tied the twitching leg to the bottom of its owner's cage. It swung and clacked on the chains, a bone wind chime. The air thickened with the stench of the rotting corpse, and the stifling taste of copper filled every breath.
He thought about sleep, but sat near the gallows instead. Matthis felt the mine from across the town better than he saw it. The peaks of the Blackveins clawed to stop the inevitable dawn. At its base, the Coalridge Pit cut a jagged wound in the mountain's flesh. Timber supports framed it like ribs. The air shifted and smothered him in the stench of the newly undead wizard hanging overhead. He gritted his teeth and swallowed hard, but didn't take his eyes from the mine. Death mine. The Death Guild wouldn't have been necessary without it. He wouldn't have had this job if wizards didn't randomly rise again. He would have mined his life away with the rest of them, most likely.