The rattle of chains and an awful, familiar growl tore Matthis out of bed. Images from a year ago replayed fresh from his memory. Partially decayed bodies covered in dirt and ran through the village. The dead ran faster than when they had lived. Torches and pickaxes raised above the heads of a screaming crowd. A corpse bore down on a woman who had tangled herself in her skirts and fallen. The awful look in her eyes blackened her face worse than coal dust stains. She wrapped herself around a child. The little body scrambled and tore his protector's skin bloody in terror. The woman screamed at the corpse. In fear. In defiance. In pain. Matthis could almost hear them, even a year later, all of them. Their pleas for help that he couldn't give. Blinded more by memory than by the dark, he rushed out of the Death Guild bunk, still wrapped in bedclothes.
All the bodies still hung in their gibbets. Matthis' breathing didn't slow until he accounted for them all, twice. The alarm chains swung under them and clinked together. There was no wind. 
Every last skeleton strained in its cage toward the undead wizard's body with unnatural, tireless strength. A pile of flesh lay at the center of a black pool of blood under the newest body. It sat in its cage, passive, unmoving, and uttered a brittle, dry moan at random intervals, a sound like a death rattle or a growl. Two of the skeletons hanging furthest from the new corpse had strained so hard against their neck collars that their skulls had broken off completely and rattled between their bony femurs but stretched anyway. One had lost the entire lower half of its leg, which lay on the ground below it. The disembodied leg pushed itself in a useless circle with its foot bones. Another missed half the fingers of one hand, which must have been crushed between two swinging cages. The skeletons continued to strain toward the dead flesh, heedless of pain or missing parts.
Matthis collapsed to his knees. Cold sweat slicked down his neck. He fell back and lay here, breath fast and shallow. Memories threatened to return. The moans of the fresh one gave the memories breath. He plugged his ears.
He arose and tied the twitching leg to the bottom of its owner's cage. It swung and clacked on the chains, a bone wind chime. The air thickened with the stench of the congealed blood. The stifling taste of copper filled every breath.
He thought about sleep. He even sat on his cot for a while. The guild house was just a square hut built in haste, with mismatched corners and sloppy joinery, and his cot was a sack filled with straw. He sat in the dark and in his sweat. The wizard outside moaned.
Unable to sleep, he dressed and sat near the gallows instead. Matthis felt the mine on the other side of the village, inside the dark night. The peaks of the Blackveins clawed the sky as if to defy the sky. At its base, the Coalridge Pit cut a jagged wound in the mountain's flesh. Timber supports framed it like ribs. The air shifted and smothered him in the stench of the newly undead wizard hanging overhead. He gritted his teeth and swallowed hard, but didn't take his eyes from the mine. Death mine. The Death Guild wouldn't have been necessary without it. He wouldn't have had this job if wizards didn't randomly rise again. He would have mined his life away with the rest of them, most likely.
He watched the colors of the black sky in their gradual, inevitable spin. The mine pounded in his head like a bruise. No, a question. People died in it. Coal poured out of it like black gold. Undead rose because of it. The bones clacked behind him. The chains rattled in the dead air. The wizard moaned.
He stood. He moved, and he knew instinctively in spite of the dark that he walked toward the mine.